EDU-3813: Updates Encyclopedia to add Durable Execution landing (#3298)
temporalio/documentation: docs/encyclopedia/durable-execution/index.mdx

---
id: index
title: Durable Execution

> sidebar_label: Durable Execution

Reviewer: This page seems like it should be a stand-alone page without the Temporal SDKs, Intro to Temporal under it.

Author: For now, the point is to focus, and Temporal and Temporal SDKs flow out of what it is we deliver. Will carefully consider your feedback, though.

slug: /durable-execution
description: Build scalable and reliable applications with the Temporal Durable Execution orchestration framework.
toc_max_heading_level: 3
keywords:
  - concepts
tags:
  - Durable Execution
  - Temporal
  - Concepts
---

import PrettyImage from '@site/src/components/pretty-image/PrettyImage';

> How would you change the way you code if your app _couldn't_ fail?

Reviewer: This opening question might not be needed. If there's an opening sentence like this, I would expect there to be continuation in this tone of building the main concept up. But I don't think that's necessarily needed.

Author: Understood. I'm going to keep it as a longstanding Temporal point of value for now.

> Durable Execution builds reliable solutions that keep working, even when networks fail or an instance of your app crashes.

Reviewer: I'm wary of the term "solutions" - I feel like that's generally used in SaaS messaging.

Author: We can always go with systems.

> It tracks progress and state, so your work isn't lost and your processes keep running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It tracks progress and application state, so your work isn't lost and your processes keep running.
```

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. Unfortunately, this suggested makes app/application appear in 5 consecutive sentences without a breath.

Reviewer: I feel like that's ok since that's like SDK appearing a lot. It's just going to happen. As a new-to-temporal user, I don't think I'd really understand what this about - and I've heard this feedback from my engineer friends.

Author: Finding a synonym and I'll add that in.

Whether your app faces a service outage or unexpected shutdown, Durable Execution makes sure it picks up where it left off, with no progress lost.
This reliability lets your app handle disruptions and keep delivering results.

> ## You handle flows; Temporal handles recovery {#focus}

Reviewer: Since it's not only about recovery, I would be wary of putting this title. A story line could be Temporal handles the "what ifs" or something like that. But that's not necessarily needed on this page.

Reviewer: Maybe something like Durable code by default - just an idea.

Author: I am not a fan of this header and couldn't think of anything good. Durable code by default is certainly not bad, but the aim is to emphasize the reduction of work. I think Durable code by default is decent, but if we could come up with anything that really hits "No more recovery in your nice cleaned up code that's so much more compact", I'd prefer that.

With Durable Execution, you focus on your workflows and business logic, not on handling errors.

> The following code is real and works:

Reviewer: I like breaking up the text with images but I'm not sure I would understand this image if I was a New to Temporal user. Based on the code snippet, the next thing I might look into the Sleep functionality of Temporal and then probably find my way to the SDK docs. I'm guessing what do we want to get out of this image.

Author: I'm going to courteously disagree as I feel the image has great emotional resonance for many developers. Happy to discuss it further though.

![Sample showing minimal code for a long-running process](/img/encyclopedia/durable-execution/remind-user-workflow.png)

You end up with streamlined code that's more durable:

- **Cleaner code**.

>   Move handling for abnormal conditions like network and hardware errors out of your logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shift the burden of handling abnormal conditions, like network and hardware errors away from your application logic.
Durable Execution streamlines these complexities for you.
```

Author: I see what you're going for, but I'm not sure the extra words add enough to justify giving up clear, short, and punchy.

Reviewer: In this sentence, some context might be needed. I'd wonder: 1) handling for what? or what type of handling? 2) logic? if there a specific type of logic being talked about or are you just talking about code? 3) abnormal conditions -- there might be a better word for describing network/hardware error. 4) how does this relate to cleaner code? 

And I'd have the same similar way of thinking for each of the bullet points and asking the similar questions.

Author: Good points. Massaging the wording, thanks.

>   You won't need it with Durable Execution.

Reviewer: Since these are still docs, I'd be wary of ultimate or very definitive statements like you won't need it.

Author: Good point. Will consider this in the context that we use a lot of definitive statements about Temporal.

> - **Run forever.**

Reviewer: Great work! I will pick up the rest of the review later.

  Don’t worry about crashes or system outages, even over years or decades.
  Temporal mitigates it.

- **Runs under every condition.**

>   Durable Execution separates progress tracking from implementation details.

Reviewer: This sentence I find a bit confusing if I didn't know what Temporal is - I'd wonder how it separates progress tracking from implementation details.

Author: Good point. Adapting the text.

>   When things go wrong, you can wait for them to resolve, move processing to other systems, or even other regions and centers.

Reviewer: With the bullet point format, I think it would be a good idea to add case studies link to each one so people can dive into better what each bullet point means for them and their potential uses.

Author: Great suggestion but I don't have case study links. Resolving for now.

- **Deploy and run at the same time.**
  Durable Execution makes sure that each time your code runs, it follows the original logic and pathway.
  Ship updates and patches without changing outcomes for your existing long-running processes.

> How do you get these results? It starts with Temporal's Durable Execution promises.

Reviewer: I feel like this is a bit of marketing language and I'd just wonder what are the promises of Temporal.

Author: Rewording.

> ## Temporal's value proposition {#value}

Reviewer: I'm not sure if we should use this title. This sounds a bit marketing.

Durable Execution offers a powerful solution for building reliable and scalable applications.
It ensures that your workflows continue seamlessly, even when facing failures or disruptions.

> Durable Execution is:

Reviewer: Can this section be combined with the previous section? My attention might fall at this point if I was a new user or I'd start skimming the rest of the docs.

Author: Good point. Let me see what I can do.

> 

Reviewer: This section is great! Can it just replace the section before this? It might have to made a tad bit less complex but I like the language of this section.

  Durable Execution handles state and errors related to platform issues, such as network outages or infrastructure failures so you don't have to.

- **Won't repeat work**:
  Durable Execution ensures tasks are not repeated unnecessarily.
  When a task fails, it retries it using policies designed to ensure success without duplicating work.
  This keeps the process consistent, eliminating redundant work even when errors arise.
  You won't be sending out seven pizzas when the customer ordered just one.

- **Naturally recoverable**:
  Even in worst-case scenarios, Durable Execution recovers execution without losing progress.
  Moving to new hardware or service center deployments won't interrupt your workflows.

- **Inherently observable**:
  Durable Execution makes the state, health, and progress of your app fully visible.
  It tracks tasks in real time, so you see progress, failures, and retries as they happen.

These features work together to make sure your process will keep moving forward and complete successfully.
Temporal's implementation of Durable Execution, whether you're self hosting or using our world class Temporal Cloud service, provide the solution.

> ## Temporal and Durable Execution

Reviewer: Is this section essentially - How Durable Execution works with Temporal?

Reviewer: That might be helpful as its own subpage.

Author: I moved it down the page for now. It can be broken out if we need to.

> When using the Temporal Service, Durable Execution separates your work's state and progress (called your "Event History") of from its code.

Reviewer: This is assuming that they know what the Temporal Service is

Author: Good point. Changed.

> When using the Temporal Service, Durable Execution separates your work's state and progress (called your "Event History") of from its code.

Reviewer: I'd wonder what "your work's state" is and this might be an oversimplification of the Event History. I might be confused and just google search Event History after this sentence.

Author: Noted. Not going to change for now, but want to circle back.

This abstracted oversight (called "orchestration") takes place on a central server.
It uses a persistent state and progress data store.
That means if your computing breaks, your workflows won't.

> Temporal's approach offers specific advantages:

Reviewer: At this section, I'd likely would be really lost since I wouldn't know what the Temporal Service is if, for example, I found this page on a Google search.

Author: Noted, thanks.

  An idempotent approach prevents process duplication, like withdrawing money twice or accidentally shipping extra orders.
  Run-once actions maintain data integrity and prevent costly errors.
  Idempotency keeps operations from producing additional effects, protecting your processes from accidental or repeated actions, ensuring reliable execution.

- **Determinism**:
  Durable Execution stores and tracks every workflow as an abstract entity.
  If you need to restart the process under extreme circumstances, that process must align with the original run.
  You can't change a random number or a real measurement (like temperature, time, or location) from the first run.
  If you do, you can't just pick up from where you left off because the work no longer matches the earlier history.

  Durable Execution requires your workflow code to be deterministic.
  Every time it runs or is replayed, the outcomes must be the same.
  This is the only way centralized control can provide all of Durable Execution's features.

  Does this mean you can’t use random numbers or run your work on different days or in different environments?
  Of course not.

>   It means your code must reliably pick up from where it left off without changing the past in any logical way.

Reviewer: I have a lot more feedback. Since this is a lot of feedback, I'll just set up a meeting with you instead of spamming everyone with comments! This piece is great and thank you so much for your hard work on this!

Author: I'm not sure I have time on Meeting Tuesday to do this and we'll have feedback hopefully after Weds.

  This is called determinism.
  It ensures that given the same starting conditions, your workflows behave identically during each execution.
  Your results are reliable and assured.

With Temporal's pre-requisites in place, you're ready to start adopting Durable Execution into your "can't fail" applications.

## Wrap-up {#wrap-up}

> Durable Execution helps you build reliable and scalable applications.

Reviewer: This paragraph is great. Maybe it can just be the intro paragraph. I might avoid "task orchestration" - there's probably an easier way to say this. Assuming this would be a high traffic page that anyone at any level could find themselves to this page.

Author: addressed
